# What is Dynamic Programming?

**Dynamic Programming** (DP) is a programming paradigm that can systematically and efficiently explore all possible solutions to a problem. As such, it is capable of solving a wide variety of problems that often have the following characteristics:

1.  The problem can be broken down into "overlapping subproblems" - smaller versions of the original problem that are re-used multiple times.
2.  The problem has an "optimal substructure" - an optimal solution can be formed from optimal solutions to the overlapping subproblems of the original problem.

As a beginner, these theoretical definitions may be hard to wrap your head around. Don't worry though - at the end of this chapter, we'll talk about how to practically spot when DP is applicable. For now, let's look a little deeper at both characteristics.

The [Fibonacci sequence](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Fibonacci_number) is a classic example used to explain DP. For those who are unfamiliar with the Fibonacci sequence, it is a sequence of numbers that starts with 0, 1, and each subsequent number is obtained by adding the previous two numbers together.

If you wanted to find the <math><semantics><mrow><msup><mi>n</mi><mrow><mi>t</mi><mi>h</mi></mrow></msup></mrow><annotation encoding="application/x-tex">n^{th}</annotation></semantics></math>nth Fibonacci number <math><semantics><mrow><mi>F</mi><mo>(</mo><mi>n</mi><mo>)</mo></mrow><annotation encoding="application/x-tex">F(n)</annotation></semantics></math>F(n), you can break it down into smaller **subproblems** - find <math><semantics><mrow><mi>F</mi><mo>(</mo><mi>n</mi><mo>−</mo><mn>1</mn><mo>)</mo></mrow><annotation encoding="application/x-tex">F(n - 1)</annotation></semantics></math>F(n−1) and <math><semantics><mrow><mi>F</mi><mo>(</mo><mi>n</mi><mo>−</mo><mn>2</mn><mo>)</mo></mrow><annotation encoding="application/x-tex">F(n - 2)</annotation></semantics></math>F(n−2) instead. Then, adding the solutions to these subproblems together gives the answer to the original question, <math><semantics><mrow><mi>F</mi><mo>(</mo><mi>n</mi><mo>−</mo><mn>1</mn><mo>)</mo><mo>+</mo><mi>F</mi><mo>(</mo><mi>n</mi><mo>−</mo><mn>2</mn><mo>)</mo><mo>=</mo><mi>F</mi><mo>(</mo><mi>n</mi><mo>)</mo></mrow><annotation encoding="application/x-tex">F(n - 1) + F(n - 2) = F(n)</annotation></semantics></math>F(n−1)+F(n−2)=F(n), which means the problem has **optimal substructure**, since a solution <math><semantics><mrow><mi>F</mi><mo>(</mo><mi>n</mi><mo>)</mo></mrow><annotation encoding="application/x-tex">F(n)</annotation></semantics></math>F(n) to the original problem can be formed from the solutions to the subproblems. These subproblems are also **overlapping** - for example, we would need <math><semantics><mrow><mi>F</mi><mo>(</mo><mn>4</mn><mo>)</mo></mrow><annotation encoding="application/x-tex">F(4)</annotation></semantics></math>F(4) to calculate both <math><semantics><mrow><mi>F</mi><mo>(</mo><mn>5</mn><mo>)</mo></mrow><annotation encoding="application/x-tex">F(5)</annotation></semantics></math>F(5) and <math><semantics><mrow><mi>F</mi><mo>(</mo><mn>6</mn><mo>)</mo></mrow><annotation encoding="application/x-tex">F(6)</annotation></semantics></math>F(6).

These attributes may seem familiar to you. Greedy problems have optimal substructure, but not overlapping subproblems. Divide and conquer algorithms break a problem into subproblems, but these subproblems are not **overlapping** (which is why DP and divide and conquer are commonly mistaken for one another).

Dynamic programming is a powerful tool because it can break a complex problem into manageable subproblems, avoid unnecessary recalculation of overlapping subproblems, and use the results of those subproblems to solve the initial complex problem. DP not only aids us in solving complex problems, but it also greatly improves the time complexity compared to brute force solutions. For example, the brute force solution for calculating the Fibonacci sequence has exponential time complexity, while the dynamic programming solution will have linear time complexity. Throughout this explore card, you will gain a better understanding of what makes DP so powerful. In the next section, we'll discuss the two main methods of implementing a DP algorithm.
